Introduction
Body image is considered to have an important impact on both physical and mental health as individuals who are not satisfied with their bodies may engage in compensatory behaviours such as inappropriate dietary practices, compulsive exercise, and social avoidance. Such behaviours can lead to health-related problems including eating disorders, obesity, depression, and low self-esteem. (e.g. Grogan, 2006; Littleton & Ollendick, 2003; Stice, Hayward, Cameron, Killen, & Taylor, 2000).
Body dissatisfaction among children has been examined with some regularity but there are three different dimensions of body image that are relatively under-investigated in younger populations: desire for muscularity; social physique anxiety; and body esteem.
For example, information on the desire for muscularity in children is limited (McCabe, Ricciardelli, & Holt, 2005). The measurement of muscularity is of importance as several health problems can be associated with muscularity concerns, particularly among males (Cafri & Thompson, 2004; Pope, Phillips, & Olivardia, 2000; Ricciardelli, McCabe, Mussap, & Holt, 2009). As muscularity is a research area that is only relatively new, there is a dearth of information regarding the particular areas of the body where children would like increased muscularity.
Social physique anxiety, which is the anxiety that people experience in response to others’ evaluation of their physiques (Hart, Leary, & Rejeski, 1989), is another body image construct that has rarely been studied in children. Research involving both adults and adolescents suggest that individuals who experience high levels of social physique anxiety are also likely to suffer depression related to their bodies, and attempt to improve/change their physiques through a variety of strategies, some of which may be harmful (e.g. dieting and over exercising) (Hart et al., 1989). In addition, social physique anxiety can have important implications for exercise behaviours in adults; it can both discourage and promote participation in sport. However, little is known about the impact of social physique anxiety in children. Indeed, to the best of the knowledge of the current researcher, levels of social physique anxiety and its implications for physical activity in young populations have not been investigated as yet. Given that adults and adolescents with high levels of social physique anxiety may engage in unhealthy behaviors that can lead to negative health consequences, it is important to examine this construct in children to see if it is possible to prevent these health consequences.
Body esteem is the third dimension of body image dimension that is relatively under-investigated in children. Body esteem is a construct that includes the attitudes, evaluations, and feelings of an individual about their body (Meldenson & White, 1985). Body esteem has been related to body
dissatisfaction, with low levels of body esteem associated with body image dissatisfaction (Gardner, Friedman, & Jackson, 1999). Again, as for other body image measures individuals with low body esteem are more likely to may engage in unhealthy behaviours that can lead to health problems. Research examining body esteem in children, is particularly sparse with respect to possible gender and age differences.
In summary, more research examining body image in children, including assessment of multiple dimensions, specifically desire for muscularity, social physique anxiety and body esteem is needed.
The present study involved a survey of children with the goal of addressing this gap. Participants were 339 boys and girls aged between 8 and 13 years, in Grades 3 to 6 from 13 Catholic primary (elementary) schools in the North and West (metropolitan) region of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. The survey obtained information about body size satisfaction, attitudes and feelings about the body and appearance, desire for muscularity, and social physique anxiety. The study had two main aims:
• To examine the prevalence of body size dissatisfaction and desire for muscularity in pre-adolescent children
• To examine multiple dimensions of body image relevant for pre-adolescent boys and girls
The specific research questions were:
1. What proportion of children are dissatisfied with their body size?
2. What proportion of children desire more muscularity? With the follow-up question: What proportion of children desire more muscularity for specific body parts?
3. Are there any age or gender differences with respect to body size dissatisfaction, body esteem, desire for muscularity, and social physique anxiety in pre-adolescent children?
The first two research questions are addressed in step 1 of the data analysis, which is described in Chapter 6 (methodology and methods) of the thesis. Findings regarding these research questions are presented in Chapter 7 (body image results).
The third research question was addressed in steps 1 and 2 of the data analysis, again described in Chapter 6 (methodology and methods) of the thesis with findings reported in Chapter 7 (body image results).
Chapter 6: Methodology and Methods
This chapter begins with a statement of the hypothesis, followed by a description of the design of the study, a description of participant characteristics, and participant selection including inclusion and exclusion criteria, sample size, and the process of recruitment.
The chapter also includes descriptions of the measures used in this study and the criteria used to select these measures. The procedures of the study are also described and the final section of the chapter discusses how data were analysed.
Hypothesis
In a group of pre-adolescent children (aged 8-13 years) there will gender and age differences in the measures used to assess body image.
Study design
This study used a cross-sectional survey design with the goal of recruiting a sample representative of a well-defined population (Mitchell & Jolley, 2010). This decision was taken because of the exploratory nature of this investigation and the scope of the study (as an unfunded dissertation).
Study population
Participants were children in Grades 3 to 6 from Catholic primary schools in the North and West metropolitan region of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. This region is one of three Melbourne regions (the others being the Eastern and the Southern metropolitan regions) as per the Victorian State Government Department of Human Services classification (Victorian Government Department of Human Services, 2012). The North and West metropolitan region of Melbourne has 31% of Victoria’s population, is ethnically and culturally diverse, and includes 24% of Victoria’s Indigenous population (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people). This region includes 11 of the 15 most disadvantaged local government areas in the Melbourne metropolitan area.
The suburbs in the region fall into all levels of disadvantage, from the most disadvantaged to the least disadvantaged. The rationale for the choice of such a specific population was based on the design of this investigation.
Had the study been funded at a sufficient level, other regions of Melbourne would have been surveyed, as would have children in government and other non-government schools. The use of a well-defined population has the potential to improve internal validity (as it allows greater control over potential confounding variables), and external validity (as results can be generalised to the well-defined population with greater confidence).
Inclusion criteria.
Only children who were aged 8 to 13 years were invited to participate in the study. It was thought to be important to target children before they reached adolescence because by the time they get into this stage of life they may already have body size dissatisfaction and therefore be at risk of developing eating disorders, obesity, low self-esteem, and depression (Clark & Tiggeman, 2008; Field et al., 1999; Parkinson, Tovée, & Cohen-Tovée, 1998; Ricciardelli & McCabe, 2001; Williamson & Delin, 2001). In addition, there is limited research in children in this age range, particularly when considering the measurement of muscularity, social physique anxiety, body esteem and height satisfaction.
Eligibility for inclusion was restricted to children who had written parental consent and who themselves wished to participate in the study. In addition, participants were required to have a clear understanding of spoken English. The rationale for this was that all questionnaires as well as the consent form for children were written and read out in English.
Finally, only children whose parents read and understood English were eligible to be part of the study. The rationale for this was that all documents addressed to parents (e.g. Participant Information Sheets, Consent Forms, Physical Activity Questionnaire) were written in English.
Exclusion criteria.
Exclusion criteria included schools located outside the metropolitan North and West region of Melbourne, non-Catholic primary schools, children who were not in Grades 3 to 6 (and therefore not aged 8-13 years), children who did not have written parental consent and/or who themselves did not wish to participate, children who did not have a clear understanding of spoken English, and children whose parents could not read or understand English.
Sample size and recruitment.
Notwithstanding that larger sample sizes are typically desirable with survey designs an important consideration for sample size was the types of statistical analyses that were planned for the data collected by the survey. Initially, it was planned to use logistic regression to analyse the relationship between the various body image variables and participation in sport. According to LaValley (2008), Pallant (2007), and Tabachnick and Fidell (2007), when using logistic regression it is important to consider the size of the sample as a number of problems may occur if there are too few cases relative to the number of predictor variables. More precisely, LaValley (2008) suggests that a rule for stability of the estimates from logistic regression is to have at least 10 cases per predictor in the model. Considering that nine predictor variables were going to be used in this study, a recruitment of at least 90 participants was required. Further criteria for the sample size were included to prevent
problems regarding too few cases relative to the number of predictor variables. One of these considerations was the fact that the most popular sports for Australian children are not aesthetic (e.g. diving and calisthenics) but are non-aesthetic (e.g. swimming, Australian Rules football, soccer, basketball, cricket and netball) (Australian Bureau of Statististics, 2009; Olds et al., 2004). Furthermore, most popular aesthetic sports in Australia have a low rate of participation, particularly amongst boys (e.g. the female/male ratio for participating in dance by children is 4/1) (Olds et al., 2004). This was a particular concern given that the study included both girls and boys. It was also anticipated that some of the children were not going to be participating in any sport. Taking into account all of these considerations, it was decided that it was necessary to recruit at least 200 participants for this study.
All Catholic primary schools in the North and West metropolitan region of Melbourne were identified (a total of 107) and mapped according to their Index of Relative Socio-Economic Disadvantage (IRSED) to obtain a sample that was representative of this region. This index is one of the four Socio-Economic Indexes for Area (SEIFA) produced by the Australian Bureau of Statistics and it rates geographical areas according to attributes such as residents’ income, educational attainment, and employment status (variables that reflect disadvantage). There are five IRSED levels with Level 1 representing the lowest level of disadvantage, and Level 5 representing the highest level of disadvantage. From the 107 schools identified, thirteen were randomly selected; the proportion in which the schools and students were distributed according to their IRSED was considered in making the selection so the sample could be representative of this distribution. For instance, based on IRSED data, 3.9% Catholic school students in the North and West metropolitan region of Melbourne are in areas with the lowest IRSED, which suggests that 3.9% of the sample should also be in the lowest IRSED. To ensure representativeness in the sample in relation to IRSED, more schools than originally planned (13 instead of 10) were required, which potentially increased the number of students participating in the study. A comparison of the distribution of IRSED for the sample, with the distribution for students from all Catholic primary schools (CPS) in the North and West metropolitan region of Melbourne is presented in Table 10. Note that the table presents this comparison for the sample as a whole and also for each of the grades (school levels) involved.
Materials
Three validated scales were chosen to assess aspects of body image in children including: body size dissatisfaction (Body Image Assessment for Children and Preadolescents); children’s attitudes and feelings about their body and appearance (Body Esteem Scale); and anxiety that children experience in response to others’ evaluation of their physiques (Social Physique Anxiety Scale [SPAS-C]). In
addition, subscales were used to assess the desire for muscularity among children. These instruments are described in more detail below.
Body size dissatisfaction: Body Image Assessment for Children and Pre-adolescents.
The scale used to measure body size dissatisfaction was the Body Image Assessment for Children and Preadolescents (Veron-Guidry & Williamson, 1996). This figural scale consists of four sets of body silhouettes, which correspond to male and female children and preadolescents. Each set has nine body sizes ranging from thin (1) to obese (9) with each image being mounted on a separate card (15.24 cm x 22.86 cm).
The process for using the scale involves placing the nine cards in random order in front of each child. Children are asked to select the figure that best represents their current body size. The silhouette number, which is written on the back of the card, is recorded. The cards are then reshuffled and again placed in random order on the table. Children are asked to choose the silhouette that represents the size they would like to be ideally. Again, the selected silhouette number is recorded. The data yielded for each child are the scores for perceived current and ideal body sizes. The absolute difference between the two rating scores is the discrepancy index and is taken as representing the degree of body size dissatisfaction for each child. This instrument has been validated (r = 0.33, p = 0.01) with a measure of eating disorder symptoms (the ChEAT) (Veron-Guidry & Williamson, 1996). Also, it has shown a high test-retest reliability in males and females aged 8 to 13 years (immediate current = 0.94, immediate ideal = 0.93, N = 22); (1 week current = 0.79, 1 week ideal = 0.67, N = 100) (Veron-Guidry & Williamson, 1996).
Children’s attitudes and feelings about their body and appearance: Body Esteem Scale
The 18-item self-report instrument, the Body Esteem Scale (Meldenson, White, & Meldenson, 1996) was used to assess children’s attitudes and feelings about their body and appearance, using three different factors: Body Esteem Appearance, Body Esteem Weight, and Body Esteem Attributes. It uses a dichotomous “yes” and “no” scale and is scored by counting the number of yes responses. The highest possible score, 18, indicates high body esteem and the lowest possible score, 0, indicates low body esteem. Examples of some items are: “I like what I see when I look in the mirror”; “I really like what I weigh”; “Other people make fun of the way I look”. The reliability of the scale was tested in 159 males and 220 females aged 8.5 to 12.5 years, and showed good internal consistency (split-half reliability = 0.85, p < .01). The factor structure of the instrument was supported (N = 377) and the measure has revealed high internal consistency for the Body Esteem Attributes factor (Cronbach’s α = 0.87, p < .01) and a good construct validity (r = 0.73, p < .01) when compared with the Self Esteem Appearance subscale of the Self-Perception Profile. The Body
Esteem Weight factor has also shown adequate internal consistency (Cronbach’s α = 0.77, p < .01), and has been correlated with the Self Esteem Appearance subscale of the Self-Perception Profile (r = 0.49, p < .01) (Meldenson et al., 1996). In the current study, the Cronbach alpha coefficient was 0.88. Previous versions of the Body Esteem Scale (Meldenson & White, 1982, 1993) have been used in similar research to that conducted for the current study, with children aged 6 to 12 years (Clark & Tiggeman, 2007, 2008; Gardner et al., 1999; Hill, Draper, & Stack, 1994; Murnen, Smolak, Mills, & Good, 2003).
Anxiety from others’ physique evaluation: Child version of Social Physique Anxiety Scale
To assess the anxiety that children experience in response to others’ evaluation of their physiques, a version of the Social Physique Anxiety Scale (SPAS) developed by Hart et al. (1989) and later adapted for children aged 8 to 14 years of age was used. The SPAS for children (SPA-C) is a 9-item self-report instrument uses a 5-point Likert Scale (“No, not at all”, “No, not much”, “Don’t know, not sure”, Yes, a little, and “Yes, a lot”). Scores on the scale range from 9 to 45 with higher scores indicating higher levels of social physique anxiety. Criterion validity of the instrument was tested with Body Mass Index (BMI) as well as percent body fat using circumferences, bioelectrical impedance, and skinfold methods (N = 129). Correlations between SPA-C scores and the body composition scores support the validity of the instrument (r = 0.50, p < .05). The instrument has revealed high internal reliability (Cronbach’s α = 0.86) (Fender-Scarr et al., 2003). In the current study, the Cronbach alpha coefficient was α = 0.83. The SPA-C children questionnaire is shown in Appendix 1.
This scale was included in this study due to the importance that social physique anxiety plays in both body image (Hart et al., 1989; Hausenblas, Downs, Fleming, & Connaughton, 2002) and participation in physical activity (Eklund & Blanco, 2000; Hart et al., 1989). The Social Physique Anxiety Scale (SPAS) was developed to assess the degree to which people become anxious when others are able to observe or evaluate their physiques (Hart et al., 1989). The scale has been used in several studies with both adults and adolescents (e.g. Greenleaf, 2004; Monsma, Malina, & Feltz, 2006; Russell, 2002; Russell & Cox, 2003; Smith, Wright, & Winrow, 2010), and the validity and reliability of the instrument has been well supported among these populations (Davison & McCabe, 2006; Hart et al., 1989; Martin, Rejeski, Leary, McAuley, & Bane, 1997; McAuley & Burman, 1993). A version of this scale adapted for children was used in this study (Fender-Scarr et al., 2003).
Desire for muscularity: Derived selected sub-scales
The desire for muscularity among children was assessed using six items derived from subscales used in two other instruments: the Muscle Dysmorphic Disorder Inventory (MDDI) (Hildebrandt,
Langenbucher, & Schlundt, 2004) and the Drive for Muscularity Scale (DMS) (McCreary & Sasse, 2000). The first item is a general statement “I would like to have bigger muscles”; whereas the other five statements are related to specific parts of the body such as the legs, arms, chest, stomach, and bottom (e.g. “I would like to have bigger muscles in my arms” “I would like to have bigger muscles in my legs”). For each statement, responses are made using a 4-point Likert Scale (“No, not at all”, “No, not much”, Yes, a little” and “Yes, a lot”).
Demographic information.
Participants were asked their age in years, their gender, their country of birth, and their parent’s country of birth. Weight and height (stature) measurements for each participant were taken by the researcher to calculate their body mass index.
Height was measured using a portable stadiometer which had a maximum 1mm error. The measurement of height followed standard recommendations (Lee & Nieman, 2007): children were asked to remove their shoes and any hair accessories that interfered with measurement. Children positioned their heels together, arms to each side, legs straight, shoulders relaxed, and with their head in the Frankfort horizontal plane. Heels, buttocks, scapulae, and back of the head were, whenever possible, resting against the vertical surface of the stadiometer.
Weight was measured using an electronic scale (Tanita BC-541) with a maximum 100g error and a 150Kg capacity. Weight measurement followed standard recommendations (Lee & Nieman, 2007). Children were asked to remove their shoes and to empty their pockets, then to stand still in the middle of the scale’s platform with their arms by their sides.
Procedure
Approval from the Faculty of Health Sciences Human Ethics Committee at La Trobe University and from the (Victorian) Catholic Education Office was obtained prior to the commencement of the study (Appendix C). After these approvals were in place, school principals were sent a letter inviting their school to take part in the study. Two weeks after sending invitations, principals were telephoned to confirm that they were willing to have their school participate. In schools that agreed to participate, Participant Information Sheets, Consent Forms, reply-paid envelopes, and Physical Activity Questionnaires for parents or legal guardians were distributed for students to take home. A reminder notice for parents was sent through the children two weeks after the distribution of the materials.
Children whose parents gave written consent and who completed the Physical Activity Questionnaire were invited to participate in the study. Prior to starting the survey, a brief introduction was read to all students who had initially agreed to participate to ensure that they remained willing to take part. Seven children changed their minds at this stage and decided not to participate.
Booklets were compiled that contained the body esteem scale, the desire for muscularity questionnaire, the social physique anxiety scale, and the questions relating to demographic information. Children completed the booklet in a separate room during class time. Instructions, examples and all questions were read out to the children. After completing the questionnaires, children returned to their regular activities and waited to be called individually to complete the Body Image Assessment for Children and Preadolescents (the figural scale) and have their height and weight measurements taken. The researcher scanned questionnaires for any obvious omissions or unusual responses and rectified these with the student when they answered the figural scale and had their anthropometric measurements made.
Response rates of principals and parents
To obtain the final sample of 13 schools, 72 school principals were contacted. Thus, the response rate from principals that were contacted about the study was 18%. The main two reasons principals gave for not participating in the study were involvement in other studies and lack of time.
Three hundred and sixty parents provided written consent for their children to participate in the study and completed the Physical Activity Questionnaire (21% of all parents approached). Similar studies in Australian primary schools have shown parent response rates that range from 30% to 60% (Ricciardelli, McCabe, Lillis, & Thomas, 2006; Rolland, Farnill, & Griffiths, 1997; Saling, Ricciardelli, & McCabe, 2005; Williamson & Delin, 2001). The reasons for the lower response rate from parents in the present study compared with other similar studies carried out in Australia are unclear.
Response rates of children.
The response rate of children was based on those children who agreed to take part after their parents had given consent; only seven children were not willing to participate in the study, giving a child response rate of 98%. Other research has found similar results, reporting children’s response rates of 100% (Saling et al., 2005).
Another 12 children were absent from school due to illness or for other reasons on the day of the assessment, and two children were excluded because they did not meet the inclusion criteria (one child was 7 years and another 14 years of age). In total, 339 children were included in the data analysis.
References
References
Australian Bureau of Statististics. (2009). Children's participation in cultural and leisure activities. (4901.1). Canberra Retrieved from http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/4901.0.
Cafri, G., & Thompson, J. K. (2004). Measuring male body image: a review of the current methodology. Psychology of Men and Masculinity, 5(1), 18-29.
Clark, L., & Tiggeman, M. (2007). Sociocultural influences and body image in 9 to 12 year old girls: the role of appearance schemas. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 36(1), 76-86.
Clark, L., & Tiggeman, M. (2008). Sociocultural and individual psychological predictors of body image in young girls: a prospective study. Developmental Psychology, 44(4), 1124-1134.
Cole, T. J., Bellizzi, M. C., Flegal, K. M., & Dietz, W. H. (2000). Establishing standard definition for child overweight and obesity worldwide: international survey. British Medical Journal, 320, 1240-1243.
Davison, T. E., & McCabe, M. P. (2006). Adolescent body image and psychosocial functioning. The Journal of Social Psychology, 146(1), 15-30.
Eklund, R. C., & Blanco, T. (2000). Social physique anxiety and physical activity among adolescents. Reclaiming Children and Youth, 9(3), 139-142.
Fender-Scarr, L., MacCracken, M. J., Stadulis, R., Caine, N., State, K., Gandee, R., . . . Maddox, K. (2003). A children's version of the social physique anxiety scale. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 74(1), A-25(22).
Field, A. E., Camargo, C. A., Taylor, C. B., Berkey, C. S., Frazier, A. L., Gillman, M. W., & Colditz, G. A. (1999). Overweight, weight concerns, and bullimic behaviors among girls and boys. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38(6), 754-760.
Gardner, R. M., Friedman, B. N., & Jackson, N. A. (1999). Body size estimations, body dissatisfaction, and ideal size preferences in children through thirteen. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 28(5), 603-618.
Greenleaf, C. (2004). Weight pressures and social physique anxiety among collegiate synchronized skaters. Journal of Sport Behavior, 27(3), 260-276.
Grogan, S. (2006). Body image and health: Contemporary perspectives. Journal of health psychology, 11(4), 523-530.
Hart, E. A., Leary, M. R., & Rejeski, W. J. (1989). The measurement of social physique anxiety. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 11, 94-104.
Hausenblas, H. A., Downs, D. S., Fleming, D. S., & Connaughton, D. P. (2002). Body image in middle school children. Eating and Weight Disorder, 7, 244-248.
Hildebrandt, T., Langenbucher, J., & Schlundt, D. G. (2004). Muscularity concerns among men: development of attitudinal and perceptual measures. Body Image, 1, 169-181.
Hill, A. J., Draper, E., & Stack, J. (1994). A weight on children's minds: body shape dissatisfactions at 9-years old. International Journal of Obesity, 18, 383-389.
LaValley, M. P. (2008). Logistic Regression. Journal of the American Heart Association, 117, 2395-2399.
Lee, R. D., & Nieman, D. C. (2007). Nutritional assessment (4 ed.). USA: Mc Graw Hill.
Littleton, H. L., & Ollendick, T. (2003). Negative body image and disordered eating behavior in children and adolescents: what places youth at risk and how can these problems be prevented? Clinical child and family psychology review, 6(1), 51-66.
Martin, K. A., Rejeski, W. J., Leary, M. R., McAuley, E., & Bane, S. (1997). Is the social physique anxiety scale really multidemensional? Conceptual and statistical arguments for a unidimensional model. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 19, 359-367.
McAuley, E., & Burman, G. (1993). The social physique anxiety scale: construct validity in adolescent females. Medicine and Sceince in Sports and Exercise, 25(9), 1049-1053.